In the 2010 Census, San Francisco counted about 789,000 residents http://quickfacts.census.gov/qfd/states/06/06075.html , but if you took a head count in the middle of the day, you'd find another 162,000 people. We know this because, in May 2013, the Census Bureau started estimating a new statistic called "Commuter-Adjusted Daytime Population." It highlights the fact that a city is much more than a piece of land that happens to have a bunch of houses: it's an activity center, where people work, shop, learn, get treated, and interact with governments.

http://www.census.gov/hhes/commuting/files/ACS/top20-commuter-pop-change.pdf

The chart below shows the breakdown of a city's population in the middle of the day. 265,000 workers come into San Francisco, and 103,000 head out--swelling its population by 21%. The leader in overall migration is Washington, DC, where the daytime population is a towering 79% higher than its permanent population.

San Francisco Muni has accidentally made it possible to visualize some of this daily migration. Their SF Park program raises and lowers the price of public parking spaces over the course of the day, and as part of the initiative they've made it possible for app developers to find out, in real time, how many cars are parked in municipal garages. I recorded this data and combined it with traffic data from the California Department of Transportation's highway sensors to visualize Monday, July 15, 2013...a normal day in the life of San Francisco's central business district. The circles represent public parking garages, and their sizes change according to how many cars they're holding. The thickness of highways shows the number of cars passing. 

Of course, just looking at the number of cars in public parking garages leaves out all the people who park in private garages and on-street spaces as well as those who carpool, ride BART or take commuter buses like the Transbay Express. But its a piece of the larger phenomenon and gives you a rough idea of how the city works. In a way, the process resembles a respiratory system: the city breathes in cars in the morning, then exhales them in the afternoon. 



